In this lecture, I'll do a lab demo showing the basics of how a routing protocol works.
So the lab topology, we've got those five routers again R1 to R5, and I've already configured
IP addresses on all of the interfaces.
So first thing that I'm going to do is to configure a routing protocol.
Now, the focus of this section is not on the routing protocol configuration.
We'll get into that when we cover each of the routing protocols individually, in their own separate sections
later on. The point of this section is to show you the commonalities, the things that work the same
on all of the different routing protocols.
So I'm going to use RIP, the Routing Information Protocol, for this demo and I'll show you the configuration
now,
so I've got that configured in WordPad here.
You'll see that you'll do this lot in the real world as well, where you have common configurations that
you're going to use on multiple routers.
It's easiest to write them down in a text editor, and then you can copy and paste from there.
Also in the real world, you'll usually have templates that you'll use for common configuration for your
routers and switches too, and whenever you provision a new router or switch, all you'll have to do is take
that template, change the IP addresses in there and then any other specific settings, and then you can
copy and paste into the router or switch. It makes it a lot easier that way,
it also stops you from making errors as well.
So, that's what I'm going to do here.
I've got my basic RIP configuration typed out in a text editor, so I've got 'router rip' to enable the
protocol.
I'm going to run 'version 2' rather than 'version 1'.
I'm not going to do automatic summary at a classful boundary, and I'm going to enable it in all my interfaces that are
in the 10.0.0.0 network.
Again, don't worry too much about the config for now.
We'll cover this in more detail later.
So I'm going to copy that from my text editor and then go to the lab and I'm going to paste this in on
each of the routers. So I'll do it on R1, I'll also do it on R2,
on R3.
I should've put 'config t' in the first line of the text editor and that would have made it a little bit easier
for me.
But that's okay, I can just type in each time.
So just exactly the same config on all of my routers.
Now, I'll go to one of the routers it was in the middle, that was R3 and I'm going to do a 'debug' on
here. Debugs are similar to show commands but where a show command gives you a point in time snapshot
information, debug information gets updated in real time. You'll see what I mean now.
So just like show commands, debug commands get entered at the enable prompt and I'm going to 'debug
ip rip'. And I should start seeing the updates being sent and received on here.
So there you go, I saw a rip update being received from 10.1.0.2.
Let's just check the topology, so I'm on R3 right now and
10.1.0.2,
that was an update coming in from R2.
I'm also going to see updates coming in from R4 on 10.1.1.1 as well. So
R3, because I enabled the routing protocol on all my routers,
they will form adjacencies with each of their directly connected neighbors and they will start sending
updates to each other. Not just about their own directly connected routes, but about all the networks they've
learned from the other routers as well. So R3 should receive information about the
10.0.0.0/24,
the 10.0.1.1/24, and the 10.0.2.1/24
network from R2, and also the 10.0.3.0/24 as well. It's also
going to be sending updates to R2 and to R4 as well. So if I jump back on the command line, you'll
see that yes, it is sending and receiving updates. So if I scroll back a bit, you'll see that it's been
receiving updates from 10.1.0.2, which was R2, and it's also receiving updates
from 10.1.1.1, which is R4. It's also sending updates to those routers
as well. So it's getting this information. If I now do a 'show ip route', you'll see that the routing table
is upated.
Actually, let me just turn to debugging off as well to save them updating anymore.
The command to turn off all debugging is 'undebug all' after you've enter this, you might still see
a few debug outputs coming in but it will turn it off. So let's just scroll down a bit and do a 'show ip route'
and you'll see that my routing table has now been updated.
So you see the codes up at the top here tells you the way that that particular network was learned about,
whether it's directly connected,
a local route,
whether it's a manually configured static route or if it was learned from a routing protocol and which
routing protocol it was learned from.
So you see here the code R, if we look up a bit higher up here and if I can find it there, R is RIP.
So it learned the routes to the 10.0.0.0, the 10.0.1.0,the 10.0.2.0, and the 10.0.3.0 networks
via RIP,
also on the left hand side, 10.1.2.0 and 10.1.3.0. It is directly connected to all of the other networks.
With the example here,
I didn't have any static routes set-up beforehand, so the routers only knew about their directly
connected interfaces.
But when I enabled my routing protocol, they shared information with each other and the routing tables
are going to be updated in all of the routers. If I jump onto R1 as well and do a 'show ip route' here,
you'll see it also knows about all of the networks and our topology, either directly connected or it learned
them via RIP.
Okay,
so that's the basics of how a routing protocol works.
We'll get a bit deeper into routing protocols starting with the next lecture.